Right behind you.
Right, Right.
Welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee.
Um, we have you for couple of hours. Mm-hmm.
Um, so, uh, we'll leave your hands to,
uh, given some introductory comments,
and then we will get into questions.
Thank you very much. Uh, we are pleased to be here again.
Seems to have flown by. Mm-hmm.
Uh, to talk about our work, um, in the 24 25 year,
probably dove, uh, past, past the end of June.
'cause it's just impossible
to separate the years in that way.
Yeah. Um, well, this year we've worked really hard on, um,
maintaining and lifting where we can, the speed
and the quality of the service, um, that we give to our,
our, for our customers.
And I have a, just a few examples to talk about
and happy to expand on them, uh, if
that comes up in questions.
Uh, this year on the Treaty Settlement Land Bank,
we transferred 72 properties from the Land Bank to Iwi.
Uh, that compares with 28 properties in the last
two financial years.
So that's a big lift in, in movement of those properties.
We processed 96%
of overseas investment applications in half the statutory
timeframe, and we've reduced the processing time
for subdivision transactions from 80% being done in 17
working days to more than 80% being done
in eight working days.
Uh, our policy team has had a very productive year
and was thrilled to be recognized,
and I'm just gonna be cheeky
and call it the policy Oscars,
which is the NZIR policy quality, um, benchmarking process.
And we received a second place overall
for the quality of our advice.
And a, um, and had an award-winning paper,
which was the Public Works Act reform paper.
Now, often people get excited about papers,
about the Public Works Act in terms of, um, Oscars, uh,
that knowledge that we've built over many years is, um,
is foundational to the work at Lins.
We have many longstanding staff.
Uh, and in 2020, we began recognizing the, the service
of our longstanding staff.
So we are into our, um, fifth year of doing that.
I'm about to do trips to our offices for that at the end
of the year, but we wanted to recognize, in particular, one
of the recipients of our long service awards.
Who was Pete Hill?
Um, Pete Hill was a, um,
longstanding staff member.
Uh, he started work at the Reserve Bank in 1973, uh,
and began working in overseas investment in 1974, um,
in the secretariat to the Overseas Investment Commission.
And he passed away while still working for us in October.
So we just really wanted to recognize Pete.
He's really important to Lynn.
You, you may remember, um, stroke Connor.
He came over and met you
and gave you some advice when he,
when you were the minister.
Um, he wasn't afraid of giving advice.
Um, so Pete came to, Pete came
to, I was afraid of accepting.
No, exactly. Uh, he came
to Lins in 2005 when the overseas investment came to us.
And, um, and despite him not working in overseas investment
for nearly 10 years, Pete was still being asked for by name,
by lawyers and investors, um,
who knew about his contribution.
And more recently, he was, he was the stormwater
of our ministerial, um, servicing and over
and official Information Act processes.
And, um, uh, this year we complied with, um,
and delivered a hundred percent of our OAS on time.
And that's just an, um, a small recognition
of Pete's contribution.
He really was the embodiment of what it means
to be transparent with New Zealanders about our work.
Um, so that knowledge, um, and,
and the recognition of long service, um,
that comes back to Pete.
He wore his pin commemorating 50 years of service.
And this year we will have 15 people who've worked for Lin's
for 20 years being recognized,
and 28 people who've worked for us for 10 years.
So just, um, as well as all the excitement about delivery
and, um, getting new skills and,
and, um, capabilities into the organization.
The longstanding knowledge, uh,
and commitment about people is really
important to what we do.
Uh, it wouldn't be right not to mention our step program,
especially with Deputy Chief Executive Murray Young sitting
here, who has been leading the program for six years now.
This last year we had a major milestone.
All our external users have been moved off the legacy system
and onto the new land online.
So that means every external customer
is now in the new system.
Um, their ex at their access
to the old system has been removed.
And that achieves a really significant security benefit, um,
which was one of the major drivers for the program, uh,
this year on subdivisions, as I mentioned,
we've been really pushing hard to, um,
to help people get things right the first time.
A lot of the timeframes for getting subdivisions con, um,
approved and moved ahead is due to the chewing
and froing about quality of the work.
So that's something that we've been really focused on,
which is why you've seen that shift from, um, to,
to eight days for approval of 80% of subdivisions, um,
and overseas investment, as I mentioned, we've moved, um,
to, to process applications more quickly.
Those results, um, come from changes made in response
to our ministerial directive letter
and the updated delegations, which means
that Lins is now deciding more applications itself, um,
except those involving national interest assessments
or higher risk national security
and public order notifications, um, on, um,
maritime digital transformation,
which will be a really important piece
of work for us in the future.
Um, we worked this year with, uh, maritime New Zealand
to put together a joint bid for funding, uh, which we've,
um, secured for this work over a four year program.
And that will revolutionize how Mariners used data.
It will move to an electronic charting system,
giving real time information about, um, water depth,
ocean surface currents
and navigational warnings, which makes sea travel safer,
but also much more efficient, um,
both fuel efficient and route efficient.
Uh, and it also means we'll keep meeting our international
obligations for safety of life at sea, which is,
which is important for New Zealand's
international connections.
Um, the program, which I'm sure Aaron would love
to talk more about if you have any questions, is, um,
we'll cover 25 million square kilometers of Ocean,
which is our waters, the Ross Sea, uh,
and that of five Pacific Nations.
And we expect to publish the first product in 2020,
early 2027.
Uh, also we've made significant pro progress on our 3D
coastal mapping program using lidar.
So we had a short season of flying
after securing the funding, um, for that work.
Um, but we're already about 8%
through the total New Zealand coastline,
and the goal is to get to 40%.
Um, the regions that have covered include Northland, Tasman,
Nelson, Coromandel, bay of Plenty, Otago and Southland.
And the data from Southland
and the Bay of Plenty is already available
on the Lynn's website.
Um, south Pan is, is progressing well
through the build phase.
The early services are being increasingly used.
Um, those aren't the final services,
but they're the early services that we services
that we've made available through, through the program
as soon as it's essentially com um, commenced.
Uh, we've completed the ground control center in our Aurora
down south, and constructions now underway in tomorrow.
And Gisborne and more sites will be coming on in the
25, 26 year.
And finally in our audit this year,
we received a good rating across all three
of our internal control measures.
So lifted them from two goods last year
to being good across management,
finance, and to performance.
Uh, so that's just, just a small achievement
that I'm sure really important to our team
who support the audit and hopefully to our auditors.
And we're happy to answer any questions. Oh,
Very good.
Righty. We'll go straight to questions then. So, um, Damien,
Uh, look, thank you very much and,
and, uh, it's a few areas to make some inquiries on,
but one of em was the, the one of South Pan
and, um, it's ongoing assessment of value,
um, that it sometimes since it was first approved
and some way down the track,
but technology is moving, um, very quickly.
Mm-hmm. What's the latest update on, um,
how useful it will be, um, as it roll through?
I just, um, I should have introduced our people.
We talked about that last time.
Jan Pear and Maria, who are the, who are the, um,
deputy chief executives,
and this is Michael Ard, who's our,
who's our project lead. You wanna address those
Questions? We happy to. Um,
and I think maybe just stepping back, um,
in terms of the South Pan system for those
who may be less familiar with, with what it is.
So, um, it's the delivery
of a satellite based augmentation system, um,
which is gonna help make our positioning signals such
as GPS, uh, more accurate
and reliable across New Zealand and Australia.
Um, as Gabe mentioned, there's two tracks of kind
of delivery at the moment.
So we are partway through the build phase of both the ground
and the space-based infrastructure that will be specific
for the South Bend system.
Um, another key component of how we, uh, how we kind
of pull together the, the, the, the delivery case for,
for South Bend is we're also delivering early open services
using some existing infrastructure that will be added to
as the bespoke, uh,
specific South Pan infrastructure comes online
over the next few years.
Um, and what that, why that's important is it means
that we're able to build the benefits earlier rather than
kind of, uh, flicking a switch some years down the track
and all of a sudden South Africa becoming available.
So from an economic benefits perspective, um,
the business case was underpinned by, I think it was, uh,
over $864 million of benefit over 20 years.
This is a long term investment.
Our focus has been in the last couple of years is around,
uh, really trying to build that user base
and really trying to drive, uh, use use of those, uh,
early open services across priority sectors.
Uh, and there's been some good momentum building there.
There is still a lot of work to be done.
Um, so some examples of, uh, existing use.
Um, and we've published some case studies recently around,
um, central Otago district council are actively using South
Bend now to use, uh, to, to capture, um, infrastructure
and community assets.
Um, and it means that they're able to do that faster,
cheaper, um, and in a more productive fashion.
And, you know, those are their words
and we've kind of, we've, we've
published a case study on that.
Another really useful, um, example is
around the ports of Auckland.
Um, so hand in hand with the, where we're going
with maritime digital transformation, south Pan being used
by, uh, marine pilots for navigation.
So there are parts of the harbor where they operate, um,
that are a bit patchy with existing services.
South Pan is a augmentation service,
is giving them more reliable, more accurate, uh, services,
which means that they can offer, uh, operate in a more
efficient manner, which is great.
Um, and these are just a couple of examples,
but I think think they point to,
we're doing quite specific work with industry
to build the use case. Um,
So, so chairman, sorry.
I mean, it seems though every man
that I was putting on the satellite purposes, um, you know,
and, and this technology is evolving quite quickly.
Mm-hmm. So how do we know that, that, um,
this technology is not gonna be old
and redundant, um, by the time it runs its life,
which is 20 years.
And, and indeed, um, you know, the returns
because for future projects
that government might be look looking to, to engage in,
this is something that surely will be used
as a case study given it's in, in the area of technology.
Yeah. Um, and it, it, it is a good question.
I think, um, we take, you know, some,
we take some confidence that
satellite based augmentation systems are not new.
They have been around
and, you know, in other jurisdictions for decades, um,
there are other jurisdictions
that are actively investing in their own satellite based
augmentation systems.
So these things point
to the technology is not going anywhere.
Um, you know, and,
and we work really closely with the international community
and the, you know, um, in the positioning space to make sure
that we are aligning around interoperability and,
and those sorts of things.
So the technology has fit the purpose.
I think there are, there will be an increasing
demand from users
that this technology is available in Australia
and New Zealand as other jurisdictions either have services
or are investing in them.
And the UK is, is is one of those jurisdictions
that is actively considering where they might,
where they might, uh, be delivering.
Can I just check on, on Jim? Sorry.
I mean, the accuracy, which is two 10 centimeters is,
Or Yeah, so there's a number of different services
that are delivered, um, with South Pan.
So, uh, we generally refer to accuracy levels
as it'll give you within, uh, submeter accuracy
and in some circumstances, depending on the cap,
the receiver and those sorts of things, down to as little
as 10 centimeters.
And that is an improvement from un augmented GPS,
um, signals, which are about five to 10 meters.
Okay. So, so the one light in terms
of surveyors themselves, of course, they have to have a,
a more accurate system Yeah.
Which, which is currently run
through satellites as well. Is that true?
That's right. And South Penn,
it was never envisaged at South Penn as the silver bullet
for everything, you know, so for, for users like surveyors
who really need, um, you know,
centimeter level accuracy, they will continue to,
you know, um, access that accuracy from the market.
And there are a range of private companies
that offer those services for a fee.
Um, and yet South Bend plays somewhere in the middle,
you know, so it is better from better than the freely open
un un augmented, um, GPS signals that will not be
as accurate as some of those high end high cost services.
But what this can provide is freely available government
backed, uh, improved accuracy
and reliability that can be used by a much broader market,
including the aviation industry.
You know, and that's a big part of the benefits story
when we get South Bend safe, get life certified, uh,
it's supporting the aviation industry to, you know, make
that more efficient around supporting pilots to
navigate in adverse weather conditions
that they can't operate in now.
So when are you planning on having that satellite
Launched? Yeah,
so it is probably, there's a,
there's a few components there.
So as we've talked about, um, we've got our
existing infrastructure, which includes satellites
that are operational now, um, since the last time we were
before the committee, um, we've had a significant milestone
and that we have secured the contract
for the second new satellite payload.
'cause we need two, uh, we need two for the safety
of life certification
and reliability expectations important too
to say it's payload on other people's satellites, correct.
Not ours. Thank you, Gary. Yeah, yeah, that's right.
Um, and we're, so we've entered into that contract
with our colleagues at Geoscience Australia.
We have that contract in place now, which is
with the incumbent, um, contractor who is also building
and will be operating our, our other new satellite payload.
Um, we will be, uh, well, we are now in the design phase
of the satellite payload.
So there are many phases that will need to be going through
around design, assembly, test integration
before we even get to launch.
We're still some years away from launch.
Um, we are expecting, uh,
satellites will be operational 20, 30, 31.
Thank you. I mean, I, I guess the ongoing issue, um, is,
as I say, the assessment of this process, it evolves
and its ongoing value to the taxpayer.
Yeah. Mm-hmm. Um, it, who knows how, you know, I mean,
you're committed to it, so you're
gonna talk it up, of course.
Um, but, but you know, I could ask the Uber driver
where I am, um, or, you know, my little garment.
So there are many, many ways.
And so I think, you know, a number of people are saying,
well, what, what's the value of the $800 million here
and what will it provide us over
and above what the market would have? Yeah.
And I've spoken to, you know,
we are the focus from a benefits realization perspective is
at the moment, I think where we want
to head over the next couple of years is doing another
quantified benefits analysis around the assumptions
that kind of inform the business case.
Are they tracking as we thought they would?
Um, I think it is likely that, you know,
there will be a range of use cases that we are seeing now
that weren't even part
or envisaged as part of the business case process.
But I think that will be, there will be these markers
that we will want to quantify
and assess, are we on the right track?
Do we need to be doing something different, uh, to support,
uh, uptake in a way that is a, you know,
provides the return on the investment?
'cause it is a significant investment provides
that return on investment that we're expecting.
Thanks, Damien. Um, any further questions
around the South Pan project team?
Very good. I, I guess, um, I think
if I remember correctly, when we first, uh,
came on this committee, 2029 was the indicative launch date.
That's right. Yeah. So that's gone out by a year or two.
Yep. That, so, um, operational dates
for those satellites are,
are tracking a bit later than we had expected.
Um, and I think that reflects the complexity that, you know,
uh, we're operating in the space sector.
Um, what I would, what I would say is we are continuing
to track to the milestones that, you know,
are under the prime contract.
So with our ground segment still tracking to 28, 29
for those milestones, um, what we've been able to do
with our satellite contract
that we've just secured is we will have
satellite services running through
until the new ones are available.
So we work really hard to ensure continuity of service
for South Pan until those new satellites come online.
We'll have some work to do
to integrate them when they come online,
but we are tracking to being able to manage that,
including manage that from customer impact perspective,
Any indications of cost overruns expected.
South Bend is still tracking within its budget,
including the satellite contract that we entered into
that has those interim services.
So we are still from a cost perspective within Lin's funding
envelope and we expect to stay there.
Thank you. Righto.
I've got other s Jim,
but you might wanna get on house first.
Sue wants to keep that last can go now. Promise
Not to leave.
Uh, It's been raised before with you guys.
I'm sure you know what I'm gonna talk about. We do.
Alright. I'm outta here. Yeah,
I actually was wondering about putting
it in my opening remarks.
It's still the show
And it's, and I, I guess from my point of view,
it also talks to a wider point of the number of houses
that you have on your books at the moment
that are unoccupied.
And like for the Shannon example, they were built in 1989,
declared surplus to requirements in 2016,
and then eventually demolished in 2025
after taxpayers had paid rates on them in
maintenance and everything else.
So, um, I just, I'm concerned about what happened to them,
but also about what is happening to these other houses
that I think we need to find an interim solution
because in a lot of these places it's rural, rural
and provincial New Zealand where
there's a desperate need for housing.
And I dunno if it's your responsibility,
tell me if it's not, but if they could be devolved in the
interim to somebody to look
after so that when they end up going to Tati, then they,
um, it can be sorted out.
But that seems to be a long process.
So my other question is to why, why the process is so long,
and even from my own inquiries over the last probably three
or four years that, um, the, the, that
that seems convoluted
between the agencies in this case it was Lynn's, um,
and the police and trying to work out who,
who was responsible at any given time was almost
impossible. Mm-hmm.
Sure. Shall we talk about Shannon first?
Talk about Shannon first. We never quite got our hands on
Shannon, but we can tell why. Do you wanna talk through?
Yeah, so Koto, um, I'm Sonya Wiki.
My role at Lins is head of Crown property
and the pleasure of the Shannon Police houses.
They, so obviously, uh, it's gone through, um,
the media articles, um, that, you know, over the last couple
of days, uh, they are police houses
and so Lins hasn't been involved in their management
or decisions about disposal or a mediation.
Um, that's all for the police.
Uh, they have though, um, been considered as part
of the Maori protection mechanism, which is where, um,
if the settlement hasn't been finalized in an area, uh, then
will consider that, uh,
to then be transferred into the Land Bank.
So they haven't made any final decisions, uh,
but I believe that they have advertised
and Iwi have expressed their desire for those properties
to go into the Land Bank.
Uh, and we're waiting for the final
Decisions. Well, they've been demolished.
So the property, The land now,
Just The, the, but their original
application included the houses.
It did, but I think it did bounce to you at some point,
because at some point there was
No, I never got to, Never got to you? No,
Never got over that line of right.
Of in the Land Bank, which is when we get it.
But it was, I mean, we understood it to be coming
and then as you saw from the media reports,
police have apologized for the process by which
the houses were demolished or intended to be demolished
and then moved, sold to a mover and then moved off the site.
So that was not part of what the normal process would be to,
would normally have been told about that.
I, as I understand it, and they would've talked to the iwi.
Yeah. Um, and it,
and it probably would've, based on what we have said,
it probably would've gone into the Land Bank
with houses on it.
But now what we would get into the Land
Bank is the bare land. Yeah.
Great. Okay. But,
Okay, so that, that's fine.
Thank you very much. But what about the houses that you do?
So you've got 175 vacant houses at the moment.
24 are up for demolition.
So is that, is that at a cost? So how long have you had
Those 24?
So at, at any one stage we have a flux, I'm gonna say,
of houses that are available for tenancy.
So tenants have moved out or we've done some work
or we finished Healthy Homes compliance on them.
Uh, so the figure always moves.
Um, so at the moment we've got a lot less than that.
We think we've probably got about 130.
Uh, at the extreme end, uh,
we are always gonna have properties that are untenable.
So they would've entered the land bank many years ago.
Um, and they would be very, um,
very, very poor condition.
Uh, and with the funding that we've got,
we've gotta prioritize,
obviously when we've got tenants in a property, um, those
that can be remediated at a lesser cost,
we kind of prioritize those.
Uh, and then we look through the program
to think about some bigger refurbishments course thinking
about the housing and particular areas, uh,
and then doing some work on that.
So some plant work, um, with some of our suppliers, uh,
and then getting those up to a tenancy.
Uh, we've always got houses that will be between tenants
and so they're being advertised.
Um, we advertise on trade Me, uh,
and then we've also got houses, um, that Iwi have asked
for them to be vacant because they're going to get the, um,
treaty settlement's gonna go through shortly.
So they want to have their own
tendencies put in those properties.
So a number of different factors.
Can you talk about the arrangements we have for management
in terms of managing some of those ties?
Yeah, so we do have, um,
so sometimes obviously at the moment we use, um, a supplier,
uh, to manage our residential properties.
We've actually made a decision that we're going to bring
that in-house, um, by the end of this financial year.
Uh, but we also have, um, providers who manage
what we call them head leases.
And so they may, um, manage bundles
of residential properties.
Uh, and we've got a couple of those with, um, hor nui
where I think they manage 14 properties.
Um, and they manage everything about those properties
that are currently tenanted.
Yes, currently tenanted.
Um, they engage with their social services, um, agencies,
um, and, you know, work in their community with, uh,
putting the right people, um, into those properties.
Uh, and we've also got another one
of those head leases in Huntley.
Okay. Um, with, yeah.
So my concern is with the ones
that are currently untended.
And, and just to clarify, so are these houses of, uh,
sorry if this is a stupid question,
but are these houses that have come to you via the police
or via the Ministry of Education?
'cause they're no longer required.
Correct. So, so they're not, some
of them may have entered the Land Bank, um, 20 years ago.
Some of them are, um, ex Ministry of Works properties.
Right. Um, uh, maybe old Huntley,
um, you know, housing properties.
So any old older government, uh, properties
that were no longer needed by the Crown, uh,
were then considered, uh, as part of the land banking,
um, for treaty settlements.
Uh, and so they've always, they've all got varied entries.
We, um, don't get a lot coming in now from, um,
other government agencies except by the police ones, but,
Yeah. Well, I see there's 52
that, or,
and the Ministry of Education have got 89, that,
that obviously not with you yet,
but they're probably on their way.
But the, um, yeah, my concern is when they're just,
'cause often they can sit in the Land Bank for a long period
of time before they've become disposed of into put into a,
before a tree settlement, they actually handed over.
So the value on them must
deteriorate, deteriorate significantly.
The condition of the houses must deteriorate significantly.
So I guess what I'm asking you is this is clearly a problem
illustrated by the Shannon Houses
and it would be good if we could learn a lesson from that
and work out how to make sure it doesn't happen again.
So there's gotta be something,
whether they end up in a land bank
or they're in the process of that we can do something
with these vacant houses so
that we don't end up paying rates on them
and then demolishing them in 10 years time.
Correct. So is there a plan
Is Absolutely.
So we do make sure
that we are prioritizing particularly the houses
that are better stock and making sure
we maintain those first.
Um, obviously we've gotta make sure we're, you know,
operating within our envelope.
And then we go to the next, uh, grouping of properties,
which is those that need a bit more refurbishment, um,
more likely to be tenanted.
Uh, and then, you know, we'll move into the next kind
of area where we'll go
to a property perhaps has been un tenanted for a few years.
We will go there, make an assessment
and have some major works done on that property
and then have that tenanted.
But I think we are always going to have some properties
that are too bad, um, and they have to be demolished.
Mm-hmm. Um, because we don't wanna hand over
that liability of course.
Um, if we don't have a property there,
it's less likely to be vandalized.
Um, cause issues for neighbors.
Um, you know, those issues were coming up,
So, oh yeah, I'll just, sorry,
one more then I promise I'll stop.
That's all. So are you saying that some, some of the ones
that are tenanted are ones that have been land banked
or ones that are waiting to be land banked? Sorry,
They're all, so all land banked.
Um, most of our residential properties are about 15 of those
are all from the Land bank. Right.
And they are being tenanted. They're in the land bank,
They're in the Land bank and They are being tenanted.
No, some won't be tenanted because they're too far gone.
We can't tenant the property. Right.
Um, they'll be between, but there's
Nothing including houses
that are in the land bank from being tenanted if
they're up to requirement.
Yep. We get about $6 million,
we get about $6 million of revenue
Supplement to that.
Um, you say subject to your envelope mm-hmm.
If the envelope was a little bigger,
would there be more houses available for people to rent
that you currently are, uh, of control?
Absolutely. How many?
Oh, Depends on how big the envelope becomes. Of course.
Well, I, I guess, you know,
you're not building brand new houses, so
We reduced a refurbishment
to find savings in the last round.
We reduced our refurbishment numbers from one 60
to 100 over the, over the, um, four over a four year period.
But the one 60 obviously wasn't going to
To that was the original plan based on
the, the funding that was
Previously. Yeah, I I
guess there's a couple of aspects to that.
I mean, the longer you don't refurbish,
the more deteriorated they become
and are the greater the cost or the lower the value.
So the question given that we are supposedly
the government is, is housing
or people who need homes out of motels into homes, uh,
then you've got a whole lot of homes
that might be available if there was money spent on them.
And that money for the most part would be good investment
given that it would normally add
to the value of the property budget.
Correct.
Yeah. At some point they get too far
gone, don't they Sonya?
We demolition and rebuild
is probably the better option. Yeah.
So that, that's my realistic question
around some may be too far
gone, but there's a whole lot of others.
Yeah.
But we did have a plan for 160 for example, that,
you know, we had an active plan
That was one 60 per year.
A hundred over four. Over four years.
Over four years. Yeah.
So are you on track?
So the one, and I do remember
that from the last budget round,
but do, are you on track to do, that's 25 a year.
How many have you done since that came?
Are you on track to do 25 a year?
Yes. Yes. But they are not necessarily those properties
that are too far gone?
No. So they are properties that may include,
we call them more major works Yeah.
That may need, you know, bathroom renovation, um,
kitchen renovation, new roof, you know, that kind of stuff.
So, um, there's a mix in there about
refurbishing the properties that people have got
and it will add to the value when they're sold.
Um, and other properties that we have to consider whether
or not we, you know, that's a good investment.
And how many do you demolish a year roughly?
Oh, I, I couldn't answer that,
but you know, we'd probably do between 10
and maybe 20, um, demolitions a year.
Wow. We can, we can get those done.
On the back of that discussion around the cost
of demolishing versus shifting
or transportation, what's the cost on average
of demolishing al
Houses? Off the top
of my head? Uh, about 60 grand.
Yeah, 60 Grand. That's 60.
So it was 138,000 for two houses in Shannon.
So that's nearly 70.
So, or a Hundred? No. Uh,
Is there no flexibility when you get the houses bought
into under your land bank
or whatever under your, um, purview?
What? Just selling them straight away, banking the money
and, and then having that money invested for
however long until a treaty settlement's done,
because probably all in all, um,
the costs involved, uh, you know,
very high 'cause you are demolishing a number of houses,
you're, and, um, iwi obviously don't want
to take over houses that, um, uh, um, untenable either.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Have you
considered that or you're not allowed to?
Uh, that, so that's not really, that's not our remit.
I hate to kind of fob it off to somebody else. Yeah. Yeah.
But, um, that really sits with Okay.
Uh, and, uh, what they're negotiating
for in a treaty settlement.
Um, I suppose we have to remember that iwi are
after ua, they're after land first,
and then of course they wanna make sure that anything on top
of that land is actually a good value for them.
Um, so just having another monetary, um,
figure, um, and a settlement.
I think that's probably why they haven't not taken
properties off or out of the land bank. Yeah. Yeah.
I mean there's some, yeah, there are cases where the land,
where the houses have been part of the history of the area,
for example, the Nui houses, um, where they're part
of the community is say, so it's not just about the value
of the houses and the land,
but also where they are in the history.
I think that's why some of them come
into the sandbank. Mm-hmm. Yep.
Yeah. Mike, um,
Just, um, your a hundred houses
that you're doing over four years,
what's your average expenditure per house?
Oh, that's, that would be, um, very, very difficult.
Um, to give you a figure of, we, we, um, we think
of more major works as about $25,000.
So obviously we spend a lot of money on, you know, fixing,
uh, reactive maintenance things
that need fixing all the time with our tenants.
Uh, but when we have works of about 25 grand,
we can package them up, um,
and then look for the obviously good, um, you know, um,
procurement, um,
to make sure we are getting kind of good value.
Um, and sometimes the tenants have to move
for a short period depending on what we're doing.
Yep. So it can range from, you know,
$25,000 upwards
to probably $280,000 we may have spent
on a particular property.
Um, and again, we'd make the assessment about is
that the better best investment
for that particular property?
Is it worth it? Does it add to the book value?
Mm-hmm. So I guess, um, just up to that, um,
previously there's been, um, I guess, you know,
71 different regulations
or requirements you had to jump through, um, coming down
to 47, is that going to deliver value, better value
for you in terms of refurbishment these hoops to jump
through for tenders?
I and it might be able to go to more local?
Is that gonna be help?
Um, yeah, absolutely. Yeah. Being able to go local.
Uh, we are also, um, you know,
while we've got a national provider, we can also go out
and tender specifically in particular areas.
Um, so do procurement, you know,
it might make sense if we are going to Shannon, for example,
if there were more houses to remediate there, um,
we might go out and run a procurement in
that particular place so we can get a good price. Mm-hmm.
But anything that takes away the, the time
and any of the delays, um, including in the demolitions
where we have to do resource
consents for that work is, you know.
Yeah. Every time you be,
It costs more money. Doesn't it
Offer a supplementary on that one?
So you've got a national provider.
So do you work through that national provider
to provide local upgrades?
Do they do, is your contract always with
that national provider even though the services might be
delivered by the contractor?
So we've got a national provider
who has regional contracts, uh,
and particularly in the places where we have properties.
Um, but we've also got a panel of providers that we can go
to for some of our more significant major works.
Um, or we could run actually a distinct
kind of procurement in a
Particular area and engage them
Direct. So yeah.
So we're not tied down to one.
Um, we can go to, can have that option
of going to a number of, we
Brought Right. We've
brought down we might have had feedback about
It. Yeah.
Mr. Chairman, follow on, sorry. Yep.
Just on the, one of the property one and,
and, and you say close.
So when they get rid of the houses, you have surplus land,
or possibly could you just outline what is the surplus land
and how much you have divested over the last 12 months?
Is is that in relation to the Just land?
Well, I don't know. So I think disposals are lends
achieved full compliance with helping homes registration.
The agency also manages land acquisition for infrastructure
and the sale of surplus land.
I mean, I'm making that's to do some projects,
but what, what, can you just maybe
outline how much and where?
So we've, uh, just in terms of the numbers that we've,
you know, that we've counted for, um, disposals,
we've disposed of 94 properties in the last financial year.
Um, so most of those are under treaty settlement processes,
but some of them are, um, properties that we held on behalf
of either ourselves on behalf of other client agencies
where they weren't wanted,
but they weren't lending properties.
But we also help other agencies dispose of land where,
for example, for Public Works Act, um, acquisitions,
the projects being done,
and then the bits of land that weren't needed.
We go through the process. Yeah.
We go through the process of returning
that we can actually come back to you with a breakdown.
I think that's probably the best idea.
'cause we don't just have all those numbers in front of us,
but there are, there are from slivers of land
to reasonably decent sized areas that we dispose of.
Can I, and so then the issue of what is in the land bank,
and I see you 15% increase in
the property is leaving the land bank.
So you know that presumably that, um, that it's good news,
you're moving through faster.
But you do say here that good faith is a difficult concept
to measure quantitatively.
Um, and, and so can you just maybe outline whether
you've got better good faith now than you had in the
past and that's why they're moving?
Or, or what's happening in that whole area of consultation
and the movement of properties?
We've worked really hard to, uh, to move earlier,
um, on treating settlements in particular so
that we are ready to dispose of properties
and hand the ownership over closer to the time
of settlement, which I think has been a real achievement,
but not without, um, uh, a lot of effort
to really get ahead of them.
So, you know, like we, we have a period of time
after a settlement within which to transfer a property.
But for a few examples in the past year,
we've actually managed to transfer them very close
to the time of settlement,
but one within a matter of
months, I think, was it money portal?
Mm-hmm. Um, and others, you know, ahead of time.
So that's, from our point of view,
it's about planning ahead, not planning
to the last possible date, um, for the transfer,
but planning ahead so
that we can be involved when the settlement's being reached.
We've got a really good picture of what the job is
that we've got ahead of us, and then having a work program,
um, to deliver it.
We also have a, you know, we have a backlog of ones
that we haven't, that we've had to catch up on as well.
So, um, we can't change the past,
but we are trying to approach it differently.
And that was something that we presented on in August
to the ma first select committee under the Auditor Generals
report on delivery of treaty settlements.
It's just, it's taken a real concerted effort,
but it does flow through in terms
of the relationships we have
and the, I suppose the trust that people have in us
to give effect to settlements.
'cause they are hugely important.
And if I can add, I think they even flow.
So depending on the timing of a particular settlement, um,
it may have been signed, uh,
a treaty settlement may have been signed a couple
of years ago, but we've been engaging
with iwi on particular properties.
Um, if, if I bring up an example of Masters
and hospital, for example, um, that was, um,
a land bank property, uh,
but we had to do a considerable, uh, demolition, um, on
that particular site, uh, so that it could go across to
that went across last, last year.
So sometimes the transactions take a lot longer
than you would normally for a sales and purchase agreement.
Su um, this time it's a congratulations
because this is something that we've prosecuted
as a committee for the last couple of years.
So I do want to congratulate you
and thank you very much for working so hard on the transfer
of properties close to settlement.
That's awesome. Thank you, David.
Thanks. This is not a congratulations.
Um, the Area of,
of climate climate adaptation has mapping, uh,
you've had less money to do this coastal mapping.
Um, I just saw a picture a few days ago
of Papa Mile Beach mm-hmm.
Which looks quite horrifying.
Um, relatively new houses perched out over
big sandbanks are gonna be washed away.
So the issue of, of coastal mapping
and hazard mapping advice for councils,
can you give us an update on, um, where you're at 8%
of the coastline you say you've done
mm-hmm. Or thereabouts.
Aaron. Aaron. Thanks Sonya. Thanks Sonya.
We've got pictures for you too.
Oh, pictures are always welcome.
This is our thing That won't stop the erosion.
My question really goes to, if you keep that in mind, is
what advice are you giving councils?
And indeed, are you sitting on your hands
and not giving them urgent advice?
Because it seems as though in places like Papa May,
you've got massive investment in crazy places.
Yeah. So, uh, Koto, Aaron Jordan, head
of location information at, at Lins.
Um, so in terms of advice, we,
we don't have particular capabilities to provide advice
around the what to do in those situations.
What we provide is, um, the information to, uh,
to the people who do understand how
to create the right advice.
So the councils themselves
or people who work on behalf of the council to do that.
So, so can I, sorry, Mr.
Chairman, I, I don't wanna be in terms of advice, is
that just pictures of the status quo
or is that a timeline of the shifts in, um, you know,
the movement of beaches or whatever?
Yeah, so in, uh, in terms of, um,
what we are doing with 3D coastal mapping is providing a
baseline so we can understand the changes over time.
And that's a quite a fine detail.
Um, high resolution around populated areas
and near, um, structure.
Can I, can I say this is to, to establish a baseline is
what you're doing and at this stage you've got 8%
of the coastal area baseline.
Correct. And I can provide you an oversight of that wish.
Sorry, sorry, I don't wanna intervene.
Just to clarify again,
Um, I'll pass these around.
If you take a, a bundled each, um, there's, there's a,
a series of, um, programs of work
that we've been working on, um, which deal
of 3D mapping of the country.
The, the first is, uh, what started out
as the pg f LIDAR program,
and that's the first picture you've got in front of you.
Okay.
So that, that's the first one on, on the top down.
So this is our, uh, program, the work we lead, uh, with, uh,
MB to cover to 80% of New Zealand.
We ended up achieving 90%
of New Zealand covered through this program. So
Why would you like ran a, Sorry, I missed that.
See, Shannon's missed out again
in a, in a very polish, you've got it in for us.
So we, we worked very closely with councils to help.
So it was a joint size councils
and it was an optional process for them to, to come into.
Oh, okay. So, um, we, not, not all councils
Council, Not all councils came, uh,
joined us in the program.
That was an invite to all the, um, so there are a few,
few gaps obviously.
Um, and we are working through other mechanisms to see
what we can do to close those gaps and,
and complete it as close to a hundred percent, uh, as we can
naturally through this process.
We did capture the coastline, um, aspects as well,
the dry part of the coastline.
And so we will have some measure of baseline of the,
of, of those areas.
Um, I'm not sure how many times we've captured hold on
or that, that area, um, already,
but, um, it's, there could be, uh,
at least one plus we'll have this other one that we've gone
through through coastal mapping.
So the difference between the lighter on land
and then the coastal mapping is
that the coastal mapping goes into the water zone.
Yep. Is this, um, is this,
is it obligatory to provide it, um, on a limb
or make reference to it on a limb for a coastal property?
I'm not sure what the obligations are
for council to provide.
Um, on, on the limb, it'll, most likely there'll be, um,
some information derived from this.
So they would've done some assessments, modeling to kind
of provide the next level of information to, to the user.
But what I would say is all this is available to everyone
to access themselves so they can see if they wish to, um,
before purchasing a property, for example.
So, sorry, can I Yeah, keep going.
I mean, you say available so I can look up the lidar map
and get right down to a property.
Yes. And it will give me a profile and,
and C level.
So, so there is some, yes.
However, you will probably to get the level you're
after, you would have to have some level
of capability yourself to understand how to interpret it.
Um, again, councils
and others may go to that next level to provide the sort
of easy to interpret.
What we provide is often is a visualization.
So you can, um, look at it in 3D and understand it
and get a feel for, for that land, um, with
how you might see it in real life.
Um, we may not project the exact height, uh,
information o on on there, so in in exact reading.
Um, but that is available.
So, so to take France, Joseph,
would someone go into the map
and height of the river being
x meters above the height of the
prospective property or whatever? Say
For example, um, the height of the river would, uh,
be another bit of information that we would need to get.
So we target the land itself.
So the, that's what we try and portray.
Um, if we are hitting water in this data set, we sort of set
to zero, um,
or something like that, depending if it's a lake,
it won't be quite zero, but, um, some nominal value.
Um, but if we can hit the bo bottom of the river,
you'll get the measurement of, of the bottom of the river,
um, to get water level.
Um, you would need
to get councils sometimes capture that information.
What we,
So sorry. So, so can
I just say for um, other areas,
stock banks would be identified correct.
At river level, not say
Not directly in the data set.
Yeah. You would need another data set,
need to provide the level
Need that with the river level. Yeah.
Yeah. So on your coastal mapping, I understand, um,
uh, sea conditions repeated progress somewhat
with, um, the progress of the project.
Uh, how much has that impacted on, uh,
where you were hoping versus where you are?
So in, in terms of Yeah, we did turbidity in the water.
Yeah. Um, does cause us a challenge with the technique
that we're using from the air.
Um, most of the time the, um, the contractors can move
around and target other areas
and wait for that, that area to settle and then come back.
Um, but sometimes the, it's an, it's a type
of action happening at the coast
and you like a wave action then it never
disappears essentially.
So we, uh, we agree with the contract, we've done enough,
we've had tried enough times, we'll use another technique
to come and fill that hole.
So a good example, um, in the pack in front of you is the,
um, to Yep.
Beach. So this, in, in the
picture on the left, you'll see the coastal, uh,
mapping activity covered it.
You can see a little bit of striking there.
Um, those gaps we are now targeting with, um,
multi being from a boat to fill, to fill those in
to get the coverage that we're targeting, which is down
to 25 meters depth.
Um, this area has been brought forward a little bit
because we're, uh, a contract
for NZTA has requested this information
to help inform some works they're doing
for them on the infrastructure on the coastline there.
So we're, this summer, the, we've got the boat going into
to fill in these caps, um, help inform,
and you'll see also on, on the,
on the right you've got two little insets.
Um, it helps you just get an understanding of the detail
that we can pick up with the lidar technique,
but also that little overlap, that sort
of yellowy green strip that's going around
with about 200 meters inland.
Mm-hmm. That's giving us overlap with the data that we
in here just to make sure that we have, uh, uh,
it's stitching together nicely
and we're getting that seamless, um, surface in, into the,
into the water as well.
Um, so, uh, that project itself.
Yep. So It's ongoing. It's ongoing.
Yes. Where are we at? So we are, um, going well.
So if you go to this picture, which is the second one, um,
you'll see that, uh, we've got the yellow,
which is published, that's about 5% of,
um, our total target.
We have, um, completed mapping at around 22%.
So that's the darker green.
And that's where we have accepted the data from the
counseling, sorry, from the, the vendor to,
to say don't need to do anymore, process that
through and we'll QC it.
And then we have mapping and progress at about 40%.
So this is areas where they've begun, they weren't able
to finish yet due to,
and they'll be revisiting over this flying season.
And then there's areas they haven't targeted yet
to be mapped at about a third.
Oh. And so we have around about 20%
of our target area, um, napped already,
and they're in a pipeline to being published.
We only started flying in January this year, so it's, it,
it's still quite early in the,
in the program from a flying perspective.
They wound up in May, uh, this year,
they got back into flying in October this year,
and they'll go all the way through probably to April,
may again next year.
So we have a much longer run at it, um, this time.
So we expect this to,
to really accelerate a little bit relative in relative terms
to what we achieved in last, last season.
Mike, thanks JI just, thanks Chair.
I just had a question for you around, um, you know,
I'm looking at to be mapped and mapping and progress
and that, um, how have you sort of ascertained those areas
and has there been any prioritization in terms
of this one's we thinks more all this particularly area?
Yep. So we've started, by the way,
We're not there. We're not
there either, so I
might have a little bit of beach here.
Yep. So we've been conscious to target, um, population
of areas and infrastructure as the primary, um, reasons
for selecting an area.
Um, so we have got higher populations and,
and infrastructure on that co in that coastline
that could be a threat to inundation or or tsunami.
And so that's our main criteria
and we've worked with, um, others
to help us prioritize that.
We have had people come
and ask whether they could help,
if they could extend on what we are doing.
And so we're hiring some conversations to, for them
to come along and fund, um,
extensions over some areas as well.
So we we're considering them as they come along. Does
Anything necessarily trump the other IE population number
of people or versus low line or is a combination of the two?
Um, low lying is, is probably up the top.
That's not one factor. Yeah. Yeah.
So if you've got quite, um, low lying areas, then we,
so the highest end, if it's, if it's not,
so if it's a bit cliff, more cliff like, um,
we are a lot less likely to target.
It doesn't matter. Say we won't,
but, um, its priority does drop a little bit.
Yeah.
Can I just stop that? Yeah.
It's just around, so the LIDAR mapping depends on council's
engagement, coastal mapping doesn't,
so who's doing the prioritization?
As I say, you, you've got a number of factors,
but, um,
so there's no similar strategic approach.
We're not working with council strictly
for the funding of it.
Um, we are talking to them about priority areas, um,
making sure we're not, uh, that we're working with it.
They've already put in as well.
So we are trying to understand what they're doing,
but they, um, are not directly prioritizing the program.
So, so chairman, sorry.
I mean we hear about, um, the sea level rise, um,
coastal storms, et cetera.
We have insurance issues.
What's the interface between councils yourselves
as the information providers and insurance?
Is there any
Um, well we, our key role is to provide the information
and, and ensure that it's reliable
and we've got a pretty good track record of getting funding
to get the information to make available to others.
So that's sort of where we, that's where we really focus,
which is on our strengths, the insurers
and working, we work quite closely with NHC on that as well,
who've got a really, um, close program with their insurers
and I think through um, um,
what's our earth sciences people in, in upper hub to, um,
to do work on the sort of risk profiles.
Um, and um, and a from an insurance perspective
and they use our data as well
as investing in their own don't they own.
So there's sort of a inter interaction,
but we are definitely at the information
and making information freely available and reliable
and rather than in the interpreting
and deciding what actions are taken as a result.
Sure, sure. Is that
Mm-hmm. I
mean, given, um, the current pace of progress in the,
in the, um, uh, attitude, the current government,
it might take you another 50 years to do.
Well, we've got 90% of 96 Zealand, of New Zealand,
So like there will be some really acute
and kind of urgent areas like I I refer back
to the upper mile one mm-hmm.
With clearly huge real estate value, quite an acute dilemma.
Yep. And some information.
So kind of what next and,
and who motivates an area that might be alongside
that's just at, at just as much risk.
Yeah. Well, so I think that combination of, so actually,
you know, good to see by plenty that whole strip.
Mm-hmm. Um, the combination of the, the risk factor,
so the low lying, the infrastructure presence
and the vulnerability in terms
of population are the key factors.
And then as you say, you know, the, the percentage
of the coastline that we can then hit does depend on the
funding available, including the co-funding.
And that's one of the key reasons for success
of the LIDAR program was
that the councils put money in themselves
and invested in it alongside the government.
So that, that's a really, I mean, that,
that's a huge coverage area when you think about
how it wasn't going that long.
It's a program. So, um, you know,
things are bode bode quite well
for the coastal mapping program.
Once we get things up and running
and can produce the data, make it available,
people can use it and see the value in investing
and getting it, because we can demonstrate we can get it,
um, that, you know, it provides confidence.
So that's where we, that's really where we focus
And, and we are getting, um, people coming to us
or other agencies
or councils to talk about
where they can extend on what we're doing.
So there's definitely interest to,
to cover other areas as well.
Mm-hmm. Um, and the, we are forming a reference group for,
um, the users of the data as well,
to make sure is meeting their expectations
and that that'll build a bit of community as well
and, uh, as we understand, um, what the needs
and the use cases look like.
Yeah. And as the expert, you know, procurers and managers
and processes of the data,
it just takes out a whole lot of work for other people doing.
They can work with us. So that's what we're trying to do.
Excellent. Another one.
Hey, you carry on. No, no, no, no. I'm good.
We know That's not
There. There
was one in there. This one,
Yes. Have a
look at. So the last, the last picture, um,
we've got the black, the gray scale.
So this is, um, uh, the East Valley, uh,
before and after cycling.
Um, and this is a, the 3D that we had the
baseline from lidar, from BGF Lidar done in 2022.
Um, we were able to ly
that area post siteline Gabrielle in 2023.
And here you can show the benefit of having the before and
after of understanding the, the type of, um, uh, damage
that was done in that area.
Um, we've highlighted one building in green there
where we understand it to have moved.
Mm-hmm. Um, during, during the event,
just to give you an idea.
So it's in the bottom right and 22
and towards the middle left, um, in 23.
And you can also see the amount of sediment that's come down
and deposited itself on top
of all the agriculture sitting there.
Mm-hmm. But also change the nature of that river,
um, uh, as well.
So being able to, uh, do that, have that information
and do those assessments, it helps us understand the risk
and the, and the cost
and, um, future planning, uh, decisions as well.
Are there other benefits that have come from this
that you weren't at the start?
Um, there's, there's been quite a, a varied number of, uh,
use cases of the, of the PGF, um, LIDAR program.
And they range from, um, you know, infrastructure planning
that where they, um, even small pieces of work they did,
they could do, do the design off the start.
They didn't have to get a, another contractor into do
more, more work.
So saving, you know, hundreds of thousands of dollars
of activity at that level.
Um, carbon Sea station where they can assess the amount of,
you know, do volume assessment, um, in, in forestry areas.
Um, we know
that this information was used in the international flood
map that, uh, earth science has put out about a month ago.
Um, they, they sat down, sampled it,
but they used all this information to help do
that consistent national picture.
And we also know that council choose data at the granular
level down at property level to input
that information into their flood modeling as well.
Um, so there, there are quite a wide range of use cases
that this gets useful.
I assume the catchment group I belong
to use this information for a couple of projects we did,
which was really useful, um, via the council.
So yeah.
Thanks, mark. Just a question around, um,
with the information that you've got, treat me, um,
has there been, how, how more, how,
what's the increase in the accuracy, um,
when you can compare it to the old flood molding
that the, the council's had?
Like, have you lifted the accuracy by quite a bit or?
So? Um, they, so this is, we aim
for a meter level horizontal accuracy,
and it sort of, I can't remember the exact
but centimeter in the, in the vertical.
Um, so it substantially lifts the yeah.
The, um, accuracy
and you can go to that property level assessment,
so you can start to see the impact
of a retaining wall, for example.
Um, and you'll see the height difference between two points
and that will inform where the water goes.
Yep. Um, in previous, uh, times
before this, we were using, a lot of people were using, uh,
contours that, and then,
and its predecessors map back in the seventies
of photogrammetric techniques.
Um, and they would take those 20 meter contours
and generalize it into a,
not into a surface model and then use that.
Um, and that has obvious limitations in it.
And so having this, uh, the fact that you can, yeah.
And in some cases you can even see the curve
and channel, um, and see, see
where the, where the water would
Run. Yeah. That's what
I'll be thinking.
Um, and another area, um, your real estate business
and overseas investment office,
Mike thought Yeah.
House at, um, I,
I see you rushing them through
and really frustrating everything Sure.
That ministers will be pleased with.
Um, but given you don't have to assess them
against benefit from New Zealand,
what judgment are you making?
And indeed, in invest New Zealand, you know,
sell everything and anything.
So we are still currently, um, applying the same criteria.
It has always been in place. So if they did do a land at the
benefit pathway, we do make that assessment
of the benefit to New Zealand still.
Yeah. And you'll continue with that.
Are you talking about the changes that are proposed to the
So for farmland, um, that is intended to continue, um,
but for other applications that don't involve farmland, that
that benefit test will no longer be in place.
That that will only be about a half
dozen transactions a year.
That will, that are currently subject to the benefit test.
That will no longer be the majority of the transactions
that will be impacted by the changes to the act of those
that go under the significant business assets pathway.
So that doesn't have a benefit test at the moment.
Uh, and the special forestry test pathway,
which again doesn't have a a, a benefit test,
it has its own set of rules.
And while those, um,
special forestry test rules will no longer be be in the act,
they'll be moved into the ministerial directive letter
and will still be legally binding on limbs.
And so while there may be some, some minor changes
around the edges, substantially, anything going through
that special forestry test pathway today
after the changes will still go
through substantially the same rules in the future.
So the ministerial directive letter,
do you know what will be in it?
I have a clue as to what will be in it.
Um, not in position to discuss in
Detail what will be in it,
Except that there has been, there has been a,
a positive policy decision made
that the existing special forestry test
will be moved into the ministerial directive.
Either the language used might be a little bit different,
but the, the substantive outcome
of the current rules in the ministerial director letter
should be same
Given, I mean, ultimately be officials,
um, making that call.
Uh, now, um, having the discretion to interpret
the ministerial directive letter,
how do we know that that's gonna be done?
Well,
We have at the, right now, today,
we interpret the legislation
and apply that, um, as parliament has delivered to us,
we expect those same rules, albeit with maybe some minor
language differences given the, the, the different type
of instrument they're in, we will be put in front
of us and we'll interpret that.
So, so I think right now,
today we are interpreting legislation.
Tomorrow we'll be interpreting a
ministerial directive letter.
Is it not true though
that ultimately the minister still has oversight
of your directive of your decisions?
Yes. At currently, but won't do in the future?
No. And, and will do in the future as well.
The difference ha uh, post, uh, so this,
this is based on the legislation as it sits in front
of the house at the moment, noting
it hasn't been passed yet.
Of course, um, the,
the primary decision maker will still remain, uh,
the Minister for Land Information
and the Minister of Finance in the case of a land decision.
The difference is that at present, the, the,
the ministers can delegate those decisions
to us if they choose to do so.
When the legislation is passed,
if the legislation is passed,
that delegation will become automatic.
Everything will be a automatically delegated to us.
But those ministers will have the ability to pull
that delegation back from us.
And so in some ways it, it's, it's an administrative
difference and that the ministers still have the same power,
both before and after the change to decide
what we decide and what they decide.
So their oversight of our decisions remains the same.
I just wanted to talk about, uh, the non-compliance that,
um, was highlighted in GA's, uh, report.
Mm-hmm. I see that that's down.
How are you going about as, are you assessing them better
to get less non-compliance, do you think?
Or is it your, um,
not not assessing them as, as harshly as you did before?
So, so I think, um, Sonya made the point earlier
regarding, um, the properties that there are, there are ebbs
and flows of, of activity, and I think there are ebbs
and flows in that enforcement non-compliance
space, uh, as well.
Uh, something that we've done a lot
of work on over the past, um, year to 18 months is
to clear out, um, uh, a, a backlog of old cases.
Um, the, the number of cases that are, that are put before
or succeed, our ability to deal with in any, any given day,
uh, some of those very serious cases, some of those are,
are quite insignificant cases.
And what we've done is we've gone through and,
and reduced the, the, the total caseload down to
a, a much lower number.
And so over the past year,
there have been actually a larger number
of enforcement actions taken than
there have been in prior years.
But there have mostly been in older low priority,
low serious, uh, low seriousness cases, um,
that hadn't previously, um, gotten, um, a lot of attention.
So it's been a function of clearing out the backlog. Right.
Um, I think, I think what you would also see over the past
probably five or six years, um, in particular, and,
and more recently in the last couple of years,
is the uptick in the volume of litigation
that's been taken against overseas investors,
primarily those who haven't got consent when they ought
to have, um, two,
two situations really we are looking at there.
People just don't get consent.
They either don't, don't know the need to,
or they do know the need to or just don't get it anyway.
Uh, alternatively New Zealanders, um,
buying something on behalf of an overseas person.
So that's, that, that's sort of one body
of non-compliance there.
The other, um, other professional advisors
or enablers who help those people to do that.
And a big focus of ours, uh, over the last couple
of years in particular has been to identify, um,
either individual, uh, advisors who've been helping people
to break the rules or alternatively areas in the regime
where there's maybe more information that we could give
to people to help those advisors not inadvertently do that.
A good example, um, earlier this year, um, we had a series
of judgments in relation
to some forestry investments up around the Auckland area.
Mm-hmm. Um, they came back
to a particular Auckland law firm, uh, where, uh,
the partner in that firm who was advising the transactions,
um, had been, um,
in the court's words reckless in the advice that
that, that he gave.
He was aware of the Overseas Investment Act,
but took no steps to,
or took insufficient steps to, um, to test the transactions
that were in front of him with the legislation.
And he designed essentially, um, elements
of those transactions to allow his clients
to buy land without consent in that case, in addition
to taking action against the investors' concerned.
Uh, and I believe there's still part of that, um,
proceedings still underway,
so there's still a penalty to come.
We also took proceedings against the, uh, the practitioner
to the, the, the lawyer, um, himself.
And in that case, he was penalized $275,000.
Personally, not, not, not his client, not his firm,
but that lawyer personally, um,
penalize $275,000.
We also see that issue with real estate agents
and asked to pay some of that.
Oh. And, and, and asked to pay, um, quite a significant, um,
uh, value of cost as well.
I think his clients collectively,
I think the penalties get us up over a million dollars
or very close to a million dollars, um, in that case.
Um, we're also concerned about real estate agents, again, in
that, that enabling space, uh, that they tend
to be involved in a transaction before the lawyer is.
And so they have the ability either to send a purchaser
to a particular lawyer who maybe they know would give
the wrong advice, uh, the right advice potentially,
depending on your perspective, uh,
or maybe to sow that seed with the investor
that there is some way to do this without the sort
of the starting point being, you know, the, this mindset
of compliance.
Now, while we haven't taken action against a real estate
agent yet for their advice to their clients,
we have taken action against a real estate agent
who bought land on behalf in this case of her mother.
Uh, her partner
and other members of her family also engaged
in some of this behavior.
And in that case, the high court, um,
based on the submissions that we gave, acknowledged
that real estate agents, because
of their professional background,
should be expected to know the rules.
We certainly spent a lot of time trying
to, to, to educate them.
Just this week we had a, an 800 plus, um, registrant seminar
that we gave with the Real Estate Institute, for example,
trying to get this information, um,
in front of real estate agents.
And so I think certainly our view
of these professional advisors is clear,
but the courts have also recognized that they're,
they're an important part of this picture
and are certainly willing to help
us take action against them.
Do You wanna go sub on that? Yes.
Well, I mean, you, you've said here that, um, compliant
what 1,035 compliance assess carried out on,
um, second forth.
So, um, yes.
So there's something Slightly
different. Six, right? So,
So about 1300
or so conditions of consent we monitored over the period
of the year, and, um, about 3%
of them were found to be noncompliant.
That figure we find just fluctuates over time,
but it's usually driven by market conditions or things.
So you, we will see slightly more noncompliances if there's,
the economy's not doing as well, or there's inflation issues
or, or things like that.
Or similarly, for the people
that are buying a house delivered,
when we have things like COVID
and that affecting people's plans,
we saw more non-compliance in that space.
But it is still relatively low that
I, I have, uh, uncovered a wonderful area of society
where, so the overall downward trend non-compliance
that you think you'd say more?
It's a fluctuation depending on conditions.
I would say just over time, we, we notice like it,
we can try and give more, um, education,
and we've done more to make people aware of their conditions
to make them clearer, make it easier for them to comply.
But what we do find is for those
that are noncompliant quite often, they know
what the conditions are and they're trying to comply,
but there's circumstances outside their control
that can impact that as well.
And, and these statistics, non-compliance might be in, in,
in an extreme example,
and I'm not suggesting that this is all sort of 3%,
but somebody might be required to do something
by a particular date and they do it,
but it happens all week late.
That would still count as non-compliance just as much
as if they hadn't done it at all.
That compliance is measured at a point in time.
I just, I've put down here not looking hard them,
but I'm sure that's not the case. Just,
Uh, we, we, we have, we have plenty of people
who are looking, um, looking very hard.
Mike, uh, thanks Jude.
Just to up on that is, um, when you are monitoring some
of the, um, you know, the approved consent,
and I'm thinking farmland, for example, you know,
they've got a benefit test to New Zealand,
how long do you keep monitoring them for?
It? It depends on the, it, it depends on
what the investor had proposed to do.
Mm-hmm. And so a again, to take some, to,
to take maybe the two extremes to take a, a farm
to forestry conversion at one end mm-hmm.
And say, uh, an investor who was maybe just buying a home
to live in at the other, um, you'd have quite,
quite different answers.
Mm-hmm. So at that very simply, we might look at them
for a year, at which point in time they've met their
obligation to move to New Zealand and live in that house.
And so there's no further monitoring required at
that far extreme, uh, farm to forest conversion.
Um, we would, we have, you know,
mapped out in our system a plan to monitor them over,
you know, potentially 30 years.
Mm-hmm. Now, whether we are here to do that, um,
in 30 years time, um, our records are, are, are set up to,
to allow for that to happen.
A more common duration of,
of monitoring might be in the sort of the three
to five year range.
Uh, but it very much depends on
what the person was proposing to do and the type
Involved. And so that's farm to
forestry.
That was, um, the last,
the 2018 changes special forestry test.
What about farm to farm? Well, you know, state farming
It, it depends again, on
what they're, they're planning to do.
Uh, to, to take you right back, um,
if you recall the Rafer Farms transactions back in the sort
of 20 11, 12, um, period, there are still parts
of those transactions that are being monitored,
monitored today, only very small parts.
Um, but that, that's, that's probably a bit of a, a,
an exception, uh, rather than the norm.
If somebody had come along
and say, propose to, uh, to, to purchase a farm
and do a series of capital works on it,
we would monitor those capital works
until those capital works were complete there,
there wouldn't be an obligation
to monitor those beyond that.
So everything that, um,
could be monitored is being monitored,
or is it just a percentage?
Everything that could be is, well, everything
Should be Monitored. Everything
that should be, so people will come to us
with an investment plan,
we'll look at that investment plan mm-hmm.
If it was under the benefit test
and go, how is those benefits?
What are the benefits that are
coming from the investment plan?
And then we'll condition the key things
that are resulting in delivering those benefits.
And we'll monitor until those are achieved.
So that, would there be timeframes depending on that?
So like Pedro was saying, if they're gonna build a factory
and it's gonna take them five years to build it
and get it operational with
monitoring, until that's the case.
If they have a much longer business plan, um, with something
that's got a much longer life, then they will be reporting
to us and we'll be monitoring
those conditions for much longer. Yep.
Okay. Se Um, just with the monitoring in the farm
to forestry, the, does your monitoring
stop once the trees have been planted or do you carry,
or does it carry on for 30 years, as you said?
So you are looking for pests
and weeds and that sort of stuff?
Well, we're not. And what also one other,
just a quick example on that.
How often do you do it for a farm to forestry
Convention? So, so we're not looking for
pests and weeds right, per se,
but the, the, the, the, the, the premise
of both the special forestry test
and the farm to forestry conversion rules is
that the land will be used for production forestry.
So these rules can't be used either to, um, to purchase land
for permanent forestry
or to convert farmland to permanent forestry.
And so the key thing that we would be monitoring very much
in those out years is the behavior that is consistent
with the use of product for production forestry.
So do they have to prune it?
It depends on the, the investment plan.
So there, there are some investors
who would either purchase an existing forest with a view to,
um, producing a pruned product,
and there are some who would not do so.
It would depend on the part of the country, some parts
of the country, um,
or suited to a,
a pruned product than others are probably a more common,
um, feature that we would see
as thinning, as opposed to pruning.
Oh, yeah. And so thinning is something we would see
far more commonly across all forests rather
than, than pruning.
Pruning would be, oh, I put
It to you. If you're not thinning or
pruning than you're unlikely
to be harvesting harvest. Yeah.
Commercial decision. Yeah. Decision up on that. Oh yeah.
That you say production forestry, I mean, what do you do?
Do you pick up the phone at year 30
and say, Hey mate, you we're gonna harvest
those? What's happened?
Uh, well, the, the,
there, there are other ways to do that.
Um, uh, not, not that
that we are doing this in the overseas investment space at
the moment, but, you know, there are certainly people out
there using satellite technology to, to track
where land is being harvested.
Uh, ETS records also provide a, a good record
of when land has been harvested.
Um, but in the first instance,
and it's common across our monitoring, um, we are going
to not pick up the phone, but we're gonna ask somebody,
you know, did, did, did you harvest your forest?
And they'll say yes or no.
Um, and at that point we need
to make a decision as to whether we believe them.
They'd provide evidence to support it, um, in most cases
and certainly when requested.
Yeah. So, sorry, just one,
so monitoring doesn't
mean actually physically looking at it?
It can do, it depends on the circumstance, right?
Um, in, in the first instance,
monitoring is a desk-based exercise.
In higher risk cases, um, in cases of public interest, uh,
then it can be, um, in person.
Uh, but for the most part, the things
that we are monitoring, we can monitor without visiting.
And so, for example, in Annika's example,
if somebody had an obligation to build a new factory,
a dairy factory, for example, um, we don't need to go
and visit it to know that a dairy factory has been built.
There is generally ample evidence
of whether there's a dairy factory there, um, or not.
Damian, thank You.
Uh, look, just before I get on the other issue, uh, the one,
are you going to put fees up in this area
or has the government asked you to increase fees?
We don't. I, I'm not aware of any plans
or discussions to invest currently
Running a memorandum account that's in deficit.
So how do you, how are you gonna address that?
A memorandum? Account deficit has been slowly reducing.
Um, I think, and sorry,
I don't have the figures right in front of me,
but over the past sort of four
or five years, there was one year I think where there was a,
an annual deficit otherwise that, that deficit is,
is trending down year on year and, and pretty much
Month on month, I just Gross will be checked.
The other one last year,
last year ran surplus, didn't run to a surplus.
Yeah. So it so close to, gets slightly me slightly. Right.
Okay. So you're holding the line. Yeah.
I think there's been talk of, um, uh, applications raised,
conservational, graze, government land.
How many applications have you had by farmers to graze areas
of, of limbs, land or land that you control?
Just trying to think. It's bit Craig, Craig and Sonya.
I'm just trying to think of, um, where that
has happened in our state or could have happened.
Probably only the pastoral state where we get requests,
which all come through Craig anyway.
So Any grazing, any grazing of
Any special. So we do have, obviously
we've got the big pastoral, um,
estate, which have the perpetual pastoral
leases, um, in place.
Uh, we do have a number of, uh, farms, uh,
that are actually in the Land bank.
Uh, the majority of those,
I think they're all in the Land Bank.
Uh, and we can advertise
or do an expression of interest, uh, in the local,
usually the local area, uh, for people
who are interested in grazing.
So you've got current high country leases,
which are perpetual and not proceeding through
tenure review mm-hmm.
Of the land that has, um, gone through tenure review, all of
that has gone back to dock.
Or do you have responsibility for any of that land
that is currently razed?
Um, pretty, in terms of tenure review, the,
the land would have transferred over to dock.
All of that has
Okay. The land that's
staying in crown ownership goes into the
dock estate or is,
and then the other part is goes private ownership. Do
You, we just have, sorry, we just have four, so four, um,
tenure reviews that are still being worked through. Worked
Through. Okay.
So Mr.
Um, have you, and,
and I don't speak, have this figure, um, at hand,
but what is the total quantum of the money paid
by government for through the tenure review process
to as compensation for land that has been,
uh, taken back?
What for last year you mean?
No, over the total process. The total period.
So that's 19. Say I'm not,
We can get That.
Okay, thank you. Yeah.
And obviously there'll be some still to come,
but those are the ones that were already in trained.
Mm-hmm.
Um, I did have a question here about something, um,
around, um, monitoring
and, um, assessing the value of
the spend on, uh, the land online process,
the, the the step, um Sure.
Which you said that everyone was back into, uh,
all your clients are now on the, on the
New program. On the new program,
Knew that it was comes upon.
So I'm just question is, I guess is
how have you evaluated the value and how you monitoring
and assessing that value versus I guess
about the previous system?
Um, so if I answered your question,
um, set this out.
Um, so the value coming out of the step program
was threefold getting the detail there was the replacement
of a whole lot of legacy technology.
Yes. And we monitor that as we take technology out.
We're almost through that. The second one was providing
capability to our users to get more productive.
And what we're doing with that is we are,
we do quarterly surveys to our customers
and ask them what, how they're finding the new system.
First is the old system,
what productivity gains they getting?
And no, I can keep you on getting them at the end. Yeah.
So, so those surveys at the moment are showing us,
we've been doing them now for just over a year,
but 94% of the people we surveyed last year,
they were getting better productivity than they used
to get out of the system.
Mm-hmm. Um,
and 40% of them said that productivity going was over 20%.
So we, um, are pretty pleased
with those numbers are pretty high.
And that's coming from effectively the legal
and the surveying community.
So that's the main monitoring we do.
The other, the, through the 124 million
of financial benefits identified in the program originally
were all related to the introduction of
processes that improved the sector.
So, um, one of them was a notice of changes in ownership.
It was done all councils.
So all councils are using that now.
And the other one was a notice of change of to mortgage, um,
any notice change in mortgages going to bank.
So they were realized very early in the process.
And, and the other one being, um, the ability for citizens
to, um, look up
and do searches on titles, which is, um, gone way beyond
that and pay with their credit cards eight, $8. Yep.
So you've been very happy with the outcomes obviously.
Yes. Yes. It's, um, the, the,
I got the actual numbers here,
but the, the uptake we used to do about 13,000
requests directly to Lins a year for um, searches.
Yes. The rest were all done. Fire lawyers. Yep.
Um, the searching,
total searching now is up way over a hundred
thousand that people are buying.
Um, and they just keep growing.
Very good. Thanks for that. Right.
Food questions
can't outta questions.
The, the last part of that, the last part of
that program having turned the system off,
which is still a hard bit to do, is
to migrate the database, right?
Yeah. And that's what's happening from
now to the end of next year
And yeah.
Okay. So you're confident that'll go well?
Yeah. I mean it's, it's a f bit, right? Which is, yeah,
It always was the last of the legacy, um, applications
that we had to convert pieces of technology.
It was, um, always going to be trickiest
because what we've done effectively
with modernizing the system is we've left the old system
and the new system working in parallel.
Yes. So to, to simplify the migration of the database,
we have to turn all the old system off first.
Yep. And that is largely done now, other than
some very complex parts that we use internally, such as, um,
when we survey, everything is in the ca of a survey.
There's another layer below that which measures the movement
of the land and where all the, um, the points are
that surveyors use.
So we, there's a very complex system.
There's only about 10 of our staff use
that can make changes to that.
But we have to replace that before we can do the final,
because then we only have to test against one sister.
Otherwise we'd been moving the, we'd be double,
basically double working. Yeah.
Yeah. So that's the last thing
and on track to be done by towards the end
of next year. Okay. I
See. It looks like you're gonna be about
sort
of circuit $6 million under budget.
Yes. Well, the sort of budget's an interesting thing.
If you look at how the project was done.
So there was, the business case originally was
to create a capability internally to be able to continue
to develop the products
that our customers want to use over time.
Um, and then there was a capital injection
of about 175 million to do the first round of modernization.
And that, that capital will be about that much under budget.
We've got about 30 million left at the moment,
and all we've still gotta do is the database,
but of the internal system.
Um, but uh, I think the biggest strength of
what we've done is this concept of having an ongoing
resource that can keep developing the system,
which is funded through fees with our customers
who have been involved in developing the system
and are the ones that really own it.
So, and
that model is in place budgeted out
for the next 20 years. Before we
Move on to the next question or so your customers are very
Happy, very happy.
Um, they also tell us what they think though, right?
They help us, they help us prioritize, you know, that sense
that they own the system is quite real. Yep.
Yeah. So we have a every, we work at 12 week cycles,
quarters, um, every quarter we have a governance meeting
with all the leading surveys and solicitor bodies.
Um, as I say, we, we survey the users in
that same time frame
and get feedback from them both in terms of
what they're enjoying about the system, what they'd like
to see changed, and
what their productivity is like compared with what it used to be.
Um, and they, the working groups that we have
involved from surveys
and solicitors are working almost daily
with their developers about what they want.
The other uniqueness of this project is we've,
while we are coming towards the end of the project
as such at the moment, we've actually been delivering
new systems for customers
for the last five and a half years.
So there's no sort of magic finish to it.
So, and we've probably got three
or four years worth of stuff that life has
to be going out into the future. Excellent. Good job.
Yeah. So sort of move out of capital and into operating.
I mean, they've been a very well run agency.
Uh, we've been worried about the last couple of years
and I'm, I'm trying
to figure out whether the people in the room are part
of the 36% of those who think
that they're under have under work stress.
Yes. So I guess, I guess there has been pressure. Um, yep.
So, um, uh, what does the CEO think about the team
and whether that stress is sustainable?
Yeah, that's, um, it's a very valid point
and it is, it was slightly higher
than the public sector average.
Um, actually, um,
I can't remember if I brought the actual census with me,
but, um, I mean there was some really great things in
that report as well.
Um, and our engagement was higher than the overall average.
So it is sort of a group of extremely passionate, dedicated,
um, people who work pretty hard.
Um, I mean, we are keeping an eye on that.
The, the working from home, um, policy change
and w was this year was also key driver
of sentiment. Mm. Um,
Did that drive additional stress or less?
It did at the time that we were talking about it.
'cause it, a few people were really worried
that they wouldn't be able to work from home at all, that
They, that they would have to Change.
They need to change their
whole, their whole plan.
But actually it's turned out to be quite, um,
quite a moderate change.
And um, and we've worked
with people on their individual cases
and so, um, that, you know, that's working well.
We've got from a, we've got an average
of about one day a week now
of people working from home across the whole organization.
But, you know, it's quite mixed
depending on people's circumstances.
And we still have the odd person
overseas who works overseas.
Um, but yeah, the really, the real positives in this were,
um, about the connection to customers and use of technology
and actually also some nice things about management,
not high up management, um, immediate managers. Um,
Just, I was a bit worried you looked at,
At your colleague directly when you were saying that.
Well, I'm just saying me
and Murray that we are the idiots at the top.
It's more like, you know, how's,
how's someone's manager affecting their life
and how they're working, you know, seems to go, seems
to be pretty positive.
Um, people were really tired of change processes.
That was the other bit of feedback, um,
which is completely understandable.
So, um, yeah, we are doing, we're really pleased with the,
with the positives and we're doing some work on the,
you know, looking after people management capability
and training and just, you know, listening
to the work stress
and keeping an eye on health safety and wellbeing.
Can I just then thank you very much.
Can I move on to other very stressed, um, set of clients
and that's the high country farms.
Yes. How's farm plans going?
I come up again,
I haven't got quite to the nirvana of one plan.
Sorry. You, we haven't quite got to the nirvana
of one plan ah, to rule them all,
but we are using them where we've got them.
Yeah.
So you've got a template.
So, so what percentage of those
lessees have a good plan?
Don't Think we have the, the, the number on that.
I think the lessees working with the councils
to work on their plans for with Ecan and um, for example, or
Is that because the farmers given the messages from
government, have just said, get stuffed
and ignore and refuse to do that?
Well, we would see them where they're using them to ju to
as the basis for an application for a consent.
So we wouldn't see them otherwise necessarily other than
to maybe they show them through, through
Process. So only when
they require a consent. Yeah.
And then they can use information in the farm plan
if that covers what they're doing. Yeah.
So it becomes an essentially, it sort of sets out
what their plan is for developing,
why they're undertaking some of those activities.
And it helps us understand the context that the,
the farmer is facing in terms of their, their planning.
Can I just go back though? I, I mean the,
the previous regime was, was the reality was that they had
to get a consent for every activity,
but there was a letter of sort they're called
that basically gave them a free pass. Yeah,
There was some mi some,
But that was, that was a rather unusual free pass.
So the legislation basically required them to get a consent
for every activity mm-hmm.
And move that on to, unless there's a farm plan.
So are you saying that there hasn't been much activity
by way of any change of activity on those firms?
Well, lease are still applying for, um,
for either consents or permits to do other activities.
The information that they might have in their farm plan is
something that supports that application.
So they don't have to double provide it or double repair
Basically. So you're
running a parallel system, you're saying,
well we can still provide you with consent,
But we use the information on your farm plan,
But they may not have a farm plan
given you, you apply that. So
If they don't have farm, yeah, if they don't have one,
then we need the information from them.
Yeah, we would work through them on,
and we had people who would go out into the field
and talk to 'em and actually sit, work
through the farm plan if they had one with them.
But also if they, they they've just put an application in
you, they would work through that and, um, prepare advice
and we work with
Other government agency. So
the summary of that that I prepared, that's, they,
they prefer to work
through an individual consent rather than work on the more
comprehensive farm plan,
which would eliminate the need for that.
The still need consents from us for those activities.
The question is how We, how we,
There are some many can covered, sorry,
and I might be wrong, sorry.
But there are many that can be covered
through a decent farm plan,
but the absence of the farm plan means
that they require consents for every
Activity. Well when they,
when they ask us to do something,
if they don't have a farm plan
to support why they're doing it
and give us information to give them the consent,
which we'd still have to give them, um, then they have
to provide us with that information.
If it's already there in the farm plan,
the process is much easier.
Does that, if that makes sense.
We can't speak to their sort of preference
or why they're, why they're doing.
And in terms of the Crown Pastoral Land Act,
there are some activities
that in the past would've required consent
that are now in a permitted category
where lessees are actually able
to undertake those without coming to us, permitted
With a farm plan.
Not permitted, permitted by as, as a matter of course.
So it doesn't matter under
The CPA, Under the CPA.
So activities have been considered, look, those are minor,
those are things that are normal farming operations don't
need to come to us for a consent.
The ones that are essentially
what we're calling discretionary pastoral activities are the
ones that do need to come to us for a consent
and if at least has a farm plan.
That's something that will also help us assess
that, that application.
And, and so is it, sorry Mr.
Chair, is the general direction of travel that they
see the value in developing those
or is it just kind of, is it just parked up at the
Market? No, that we could,
I don't think we could say
actually, yeah.
On their behalf at this stage.
Sorry, Did you say discretionary activities
or indiscretionary activities, discretionary
Activities, Discre, those
sort of the three fully, fully
Discreet Activities.
Thank you. Some just to clarify,
So, so Mr.
Chu? Yep. So, so there will be,
I'm sure developments along the lines of, um,
agri agritourism tourism ventures.
So, um, how many of those have been applied for
and what has been the process of dealing with them? Mm-hmm.
So we have a permitting regime regime for commercial
tourism, commercial recreation activities,
which is separate to the lease.
So what that means that either a lessee
or a third party with the consent of a lessee can ask
for permit to do the exactly those sorts of activities.
And we deal with those on a, on a very regular basis.
Um, so for example, recently we've had filming permits,
um, motion pictures.
TV shows have been filmed on pastoral leases.
So they, they permit from, um, granted by us to do that.
They venture races, um, other sort of activities.
Um, those are the ones that will come to us
and we'll grant a permit and we'll consider those on cable.
I was thinking more along the lines of, of construction
through, um, different, uh, accommodation places
or other facilities.
How many of those have been lodges?
Lodges? Um, I'm not sure we've dealt with a lodge
or that type of application in the last year,
but we can come back to you with that. Mm.
We've had, um, I was it the
numbers interesting form permits.
Yep. Of course. We, we've had 173 applications
since the reforms.
Um, and 125 have been decided.
So we've still got about, um, 50 on the books
For a range of That took the last 12 months
Yeah. Since
the reforms. So that was the So two years?
Two years. The year before that. Yeah, two years.
Very good. Um, any further questions?
Alright, um, well it looks like we've run outta puff.
Sure. We can't let them go.
Well, I was, I was thinking could be, um, I guess
in an acknowledgement of your colleague, uh, Pete Hill,
that we have a moment silence anyway
before we that's mm-hmm.
Before we, uh, wind up, um, um, yeah.
Thank you.
Right? Yeah, thanks very much. I thank you.
Just thought that uh, many would like
to acknowledge the contribution that, um,
your colleague given to service over the years
to the Yeah. Ment office. So,
And Pete has a child, Felicity Hill,
who also works fills, so she
Will be Oh Wow.
Thrilled to see that. And thank you.
So thank you very much. Thanks.
Thank you. Finish well
Done. Thank you.